# Phase III: Prototypes and User Testing


## Introduction

Throughout our progress we have already gone through the designing of wireframes and conducted cognitive walkthroughs to structure our ideas. For this phase of the project we intend to flesh out interactable prototypes and gather real user data to further understand how our implementation and production of the app would be used and worked with by others.


## Methods

We decided to help obtain user feedback by preparing an interactive prototype of our app as well as using the prototype, along with a set of protocols, to conduct a user test study. As a part of our prep work we also became CITI certified in _Social and Behavioral Responsible Conduct of Research_. In order to make our prototype we used Figma along with asset libraries to modify our existing wireframes to mimic how a finalized version of the app might function and interact. We then came up with some preliminary questions where we asked the users if they have experience using tracking apps (if so... what kind of habits were they trying to upkeep or break) as well as what features would they like to see in a habit tracking app. These were asked in order to gain information on if there were desired goals that our app might not be suited for or if there were any important user desired features that we were missing. Next we had the users interact with our prototype in order to see how they perceive the given tasks laid out in the protocols and how they go about completing the tasks using the prototype. We gave the users scenarios they had to play out that would task them with signing into their account, adding a task to their list, editing and deleting a tracked task, and viewing their progress of tracked tasks. After they performed an attempt at each task we noted down if the user completed the task, how they went about the prototype navigation as they thought aloud, and recorded an ease of completion scale 1-5 with 5 being the easiest. These tasks and notes would help us understand if there are any parts of our prototype that were clear and navigable or if there were any aspects that might need touching up, clerical changes, or removing. It would also help us discover if maybe there were aspects completely absent that we may have missed (glaring or minute). We then followed up with closing questions to help us understand how the users felt about interacting with our prototype. We asked the users what they liked about the prototype, what was confusing or frustrating, what (if anything) felt unnecessary, and what they felt they had the most trouble with.

[Usability Test Protocol](phaseIII/IRB%20Protocol.pdf)

## Findings

After asking each of our participants some preliminary questions, we found that most of them had not used dedicated habit tracking apps before, but some of them use traditional calendar apps on a daily basis.  When asked what the most important feature of a habit tracker app would be, the majority of the participants felt that some sort of notification or reminder system would be necessary, along with a way to track a user's progress.

For our first task, registering for an account, each of the participants completed the task, but some people clicked the register button before filling in their account credentials.  When asked about the interaction, participants who clicked on the register button first said they expected to see a signup page before moving to the homepage.  One participant thought that the textboxes were not interactive due to previous experience using figma prototypes.

For the second task, tracking a new habit, each of our participants were able to complete the task of creating a new habit, but many of them were confused by the distinction between a task or a habit.

For the third task, editing tasks, most of the participants assumed that they were supposed to edit and delete the tasks on the home screen instead of using the progress screen to delete tasks.  After navigating the app for a minute, each of our participants were eventually able to complete the task successfully, but many of the participants felt that the task could be easier.  Some of the participants expected to click delete then choose an entry, which was not possible due to limitations in Figma.  To make this interaction more efficient, one participant suggested moving the interaction to the homepage, while another suggested that a confirmation popup would be useful before deleting an item.

Most of the participants completed the fourth task, checking their progress over time, but one participant was unable to find the "sort by date" option in the filter menu.  The reason for this may have been miscommunication about the goals of the task on the part of the interviewer.  One participant felt that the tasks were out of order since the previous task was also on that screen.  When doing a usability test in the future, clear communication from the interviewer about task requirements and ordering tasks so that each task is on a different screen would lead to more accurate results.

When asked about positive interactions with the prototype, many of the users liked the habit trackers on the homepage and the ease of adding new tracked tasks or habits.  When asked about any interactions that were confusing, many of the participants felt that the register button should lead to a separate signup page, and were confused by the distinction between a task or a habit.  One of our participants thought that the edit and delete buttons were necessary due to the limitations of a Figma prototype, but the interaction could be improved by making it a 2 click action.

When asked about features that were missing, one of the participants indicated they would like to see an option to schedule a task for a specific time, while another said that they expected to see some sort of feedback for completing a task.  One of our participants suggested that a graph to visualize user progress would be good feedback.  After asking each of the participants about features they thought were out of place, many of the participants were confused about the purpose for the chat page, assuming that it was for messaging other users.

For the final question, participants were asked which task was the most difficult and what caused that difficulty.  Two of the participants struggled with the last task because they were unsure what was being displayed on the progress screen, and another participant had trouble with the third task since they assumed the home screen records were the ones to be deleted.


[Usability Test Results](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Qy-wH5vBXHDyn9_SYCTJ1EDml4YAh-hPgvU_0GExBs8/edit?gid=0#gid=0)

## Conclusions

The findings outlined above give us multiple insights into how users interact with HabitFlow.  The first task we ran showed that users expect to see a separate screen for registering an account from the sign in screen.  This is a convention for sign in screens in other apps, so we should apply the same concept to align with the users' previous experiences.  The second task we ran indicated that users could not distinguish between a task or a habit when creating a tracker.  We can fix this by adding a section to the help page to address the confusion, and by hiding the calendar when the habit switch is selected to indicate to the user that habits are recurring and tasks are scheduled.  The participants' third task showed that it was not clear where to go to edit a task, and when editing or deleting, there was no confirmation message.  We can help users decide where to go by renaming the "Progress" tab to "Habits & Tasks", and we can help prevent unintended data loss by adding a confirmation window to both the Edit and Delete functions.  Our fourth task was simple for most of our participants, but our first participant wasn't able to complete the task due to what we assume was a miscommunication on the part of the interviewer.  We can fix this in the future by making sure the task instructions are worded clearly on the test protocol, and that each interviewer reads exactly what was written for each task.  From some of our participant feedback, we will be keeping the habit trackers at the top of the home screen, and we will be keeping the Add button on the home screen.  Participants also said that adding a time field to a task would be helpful, and that adding graphs to the homescreen could help to quickly check habit progress.

## Caveats

We went through the proper training in order to help avoid falsified or biased data collection, however all of the users who participated in our study were college students of roughly the same age and a part of a computer oriented discipline. This means that we got a decent representation of the sample available but we haven't tested how a complete range of ages with varying modern tech proficiencies would interact with our prototype. One more limitation we found has to do with the way designing prototypes works in Figma. They didn't allow for everything to be customized exactly how we had envisioned the interactivity would work and therefore we had to get creative with the way filling text fields should work as well as how the illusions of different interactions appeared.